# Heartbleed Attack Lab

## 1. Overview
The Heartbleed bug (CVE-2014-0160) is a severe implementation flaw in the OpenSSL library, which enables attackers to steal data from the memory of the victim server. The contents of the stolen data depend on what is there in the memory of the server. It could potentially contain private keys, TLS session keys, user names, passwords, credit cards, etc. The vulnerability is in the implementation of the Heartbeat protocol, which is used by SSL/TLS to keep the connection alive. 

The objective of this lab is for students to understand how serious this vulnerability is, how the attack works, and how to fix the problem. The affected OpenSSL version range is from 1.0.1 to 1.0.1f. The version in our Ubuntu VM is 1.0.1.

## 2. Lab Environment 
In this lab there are two machines: the attacker client and the victim server. You will set up two VMs that can communicate with pre-built SEEDUbuntu12.04 VMs: download [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1tig6AwhUDVL84kqcV1Avp7wg526glrUl/view) and extract them. “ubuntu_seed_12.04” is the name of the attacker machine; “ubuntu_seed_12.04_server” is the server machine 

To set up the VMs, you need to install VirtualBox. You can download VirtualBox [here](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Download_Old_Builds_6_0) - <strong>we recommend that you download VirtualBox 6.0.4 to prevent issues with the SEED VM.</strong> Once VirtualBox is installed, open it and click the “Import” button. From there, you can pick one of the downloaded VMs to import, keeping the default settings. Do the same for both VMs. 

The VMs need to use the NAT-Network adapter for the network setting. You can make a NAT Network by going to Preferences, picking Network, and adding a Network. The VMs can be set the new Network by going to the VM settings, picking Network, and clicking the Adaptor tag to switch the adapter to NAT-Network. Make sure both VMs are on the same NAT-Network. 

The website used in this attack can be any HTTPS website that uses SSL/TLS. However, since it is illegal to attack a real website, we have set up a website in our VM, and conduct the attack on our own VM. We use an open-source social network application called ELGG, and host it in the following URL: https://www.heartbleedlabelgg.com. Warning: Do not under any circumstances, attack real websites. 

Important Note: If you have updated the version of OpenSSL installed on the VM, this lab won’t work; the newest version of OpenSSL has patched the Heartbleed vulnerability. You can reinstall the VM to revert back to the earlier version of OpenSSL. 

Now we can run the VMs. Get both running, and log in to the Seed user; the password is “dees”. We need to modify the /etc/hosts file on the attacker machine to map the server name to the IP address of the server VM. Navigate to the root directory in a terminal (```cd /```), and open the file /etc/hosts (```sudo nano etc/hosts```). Search the following line in /etc/hosts, and replace the IP address 127.0.0.1 with the actual IP address of the server VM that hosts the ELGG application:

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ```127.0.0.1 www.heartbleedlabelgg.com ```

You can find the IP address of the server VM by typing into the terminal and taking the highlighted address: 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ```inet 10.0.2.4```

## 3. Lab Tasks 
Complete the following tasks and submit your observations and screenshots in a PDF file, which you will submit on Gradescope. Your answers should be short. You will be limited in some cases to answers of roughly 2-4 sentences. Your screenshots should be small, less than 1 MB. 

Before working on the lab tasks, you need to understand how the heartbeat protocol works. The heartbeat protocol consists of two message types: HeartbeatRequest packet and HeartbeatResponse packet. Client sends a HeartbeatRequest packet to the server. When the server receives it, it sends back a copy of the received message in the HeartbeatResponse packet. The goal is to keep the connection alive.

### 3.1 Task 1: Launch the Heartbleed Attack. 
In this task, students will launch the Heartbleed attack on our social network site and see what kind of damages can be achieved. The actual damage of the Heartbleed attack depends on what kind of information is stored in the server memory. If there has not been much activity on the server, you will not be able to steal useful data. Therefore, we need to interact with the web server as legitimate users. Let us do it as the administrator, and do the followings: 
1. Visit https://www.heartbleedlabelgg.com from your browser. 
2. Login as the site administrator. (User Name:admin; Password:seedelgg) 
3. Verify that Boby is your friend, and if not, add Boby as friend. (Go to More -> Members and click Boby -> Add Friend) 
4. Send Boby a private message with only your Onyen as the subject line (the message contents can be whatever you wish). 

After you have interacted with the server as a legitimate user, you can launch the attack and see what information you can get out of the victim server. Writing the program to launch the Heartbleed attack from scratch is not easy, because it requires the low-level knowledge of the Heartbeat protocol. Fortunately, other people have already written the attack code. Therefore, we will use the existing code to gain first-hand experience in the Heartbleed attack. The code that we use is called attack.py, which was originally written by Jared Stafford. We made some small changes to the code for educational purposes. The attack file, attack.py, is already on your attack VM. You can run the attack code by opening a new terminal and running the command:

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ```$ ./attack.py www.heartbleedlabelgg.com```

You may need to run the attack code multiple times to get useful data. Your task is to retrieve the following information from the target server. 
1. Admin user name and password. 
2. User’s activity (what the user has done). 
3. The secret in the subject line of your private message (the secret you need will be between the strings “secret” and “endsecret”) 

For information 1 and 2 that you steal from the Heartbleed attack, submit a screenshot showing the attack successfully revealing the data. For the 3rd secret, you’ll submit a file named “secret.txt” - the contents of this file should be 2 lines: your Onyen, followed by the secret you found.

### 3.2 Task 2: Find the Cause of the Heartbleed Vulnerability 
In this task, students will compare the outcome of the benign packet and the malicious packet sent by the attacker code to find out the fundamental cause of the Heartbleed vulnerability. 

The Heartbleed attack is based on the Heartbeat request. This request just sends some data to the server, and the server will copy the data to its response packet, so all the data are echoed back. In the normal case, suppose that the request includes 3 bytes of data ”ABC”, so the length field has a value 3. The server will place the data in the memory, and copy 3 bytes from the beginning of the data to its response packet. In the attack scenario, the request may contain 3 bytes of data, but the length field may say 1003. When the server constructs its response packet, it copies from the starting of the data (i.e. “ABC”), but it copies 1003 bytes, instead of 3 bytes. These extra 1000 types obviously do not come from the request packet; they come from the server’s private memory, and they may contain other user’s information, secret keys, passwords, etc.

In this task, we will play with the length field of the request. First, let’s understand how the Heartbeat response packet is built from Figure 2. When the Heartbeat request packet comes, the server will parse the packet to get the payload and the Payload length value (which is highlighted in Figure 2). Here, the payload is only a 3-byte string "ABC" and the Payload length value is exactly 3. The server program will blindly take this length value from the request packet. It then builds the response packet by pointing to the memory storing "ABC" and copy Payload length bytes to the response payload. In this way, the response packet would contain a 3-byte string "ABC". 

We can launch the HeartBleed attack like what is shown in Figure 3. We keep the same payload (3 bytes), but set the Payload length field to 1003. The server will again blindly take this Payload length value when building the response packet. This time, the server program will point to the string "ABC" and copy 1003 bytes from the memory to the response packet as a payload. Besides the string ”ABC”, the extra 1000 bytes are copied into the response packet, which could be anything from the memory, such as secret activity, logging information, password and so on.

Our attack code allows you to play with different Payload length values. By default, the value is set to a quite large one (0x4000), but you can reduce the size using the command option "-l" (letter ell) or "--length" as shown in the following examples: 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ```$./attack.py www.heartbleedlabelgg.com -l 0x015B```

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ```$./attack.py www.heartbleedlabelgg.com --length 83```

Your task is to play with the attack program with different payload length values and answer the following questions:

- Question 2.1: As the length variable decreases, what kind of difference can you observe? 
- Question 2.2: As the length variable decreases, there is a boundary value for the input length variable. At or below that boundary, the Heartbeat query will receive a response packet without attaching any extra data (which means the request is benign). Please find that boundary length. You may need to try many different length values until the web server sends back the reply without extra data. To help you with this, when the number of returned bytes is smaller than the expected length, the pro- gram will print "Server processed malformed Heartbeat, but did not return any extra data."

### 3.3 Task 3: Countermeasure and Bug Fix 

In this task you will implement the best-practice countermeasure (patching the bug) and describe how the patch works. 

#### 3.3.1 Task 3.1 

To fix the Heartbleed vulnerability, the best way is to update the OpenSSL library to the newest version. This can be achieved using the following commands. It should be noted that once it is updated, it is hard to go back to the vulnerable version. Therefore, make sure you have finished the previous tasks before doing the update. You can also take a snapshot of your VM before the update. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ```$ sudo apt-get update```

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; ```$ sudo apt-get upgrade```

Submit a screenshot: Try your attack again after you have updated the OpenSSL library. Take a screenshot of what you observe trying the attack after upgrading OpenSSL.

#### 3.3.2 Task 3.2 
The objective of this task is to figure out how to fix the Heartbleed bug in the source code. Below we present the source code that was introduced in December 2011. You may view the exact commit which introduced the bug [here](https://github.com/openssl/openssl/commit/4817504d069b4c5082161b02a22116ad75f822b1) 

    struct ssl3_record_st { 
        unsigned int length; /* How many bytes available */ [...]
        unsigned char *data; /* pointer to the record data */ [...] 
    } SSL3_RECORD;

    struct { 
	    HeartbeatMessageType type; /* 1 byte: request or the response */ 
	    uint16 payload_length; /* 2 bytes: the length of the payload */ 
	    opaque payload[HeartbeatMessage.payload_length]; 
	    opaque padding[padding_length]; 
	} HeartbeatMessage;

The SSL3 RECORD is a basic building block of SSL communications. It has a length field, which gives the length of the received message (in this case, a Heartbeat message), and a pointer (data) to the actual message. The message is formatted as a HeartbeatMessage. This struct has a payload length field which gives the (client-provided) length of the payload. The payload field is the client-provided data that should be sent back in the Heartbeat response. 

The following code snippet shows how the server copies the data from the request packet to the response packet.

Listing 1: Process the Heartbeat request packet and generate the response packet

	/* Allocate memory for the response, size is 1 byte 
	 * message type, plus 2 bytes payload length, plus 
	 * payload, plus padding 
	 */

	unsigned int payload; 
	unsigned int padding = 16; /* Use minimum padding */

	/* Read from type field of HeartbeatMessage first. 
	 * After this instruction, the pointer 
	 * p will point to the payload_length field of HeartbeatMessage 
	 */ 
	hbtype = *p++;

	/* Read from the payload_length field of HeartbeatMessage. 
	 * This function reads 16 bits from pointer p and stores 
	 * the value in the local INT variable "payload". 
	 */ 
	n2s(p, payload);

	p1=p; // p1 points to the beginning of the payload content

	if (hbtype == TLS1_HB_REQUEST) 
	{
		unsigned char *buffer, *bp; 
		int r;

		/* Allocate memory for the response, size is 1 byte 
		 * message type, plus 2 bytes payload length, plus 
		 * payload, plus padding 
		 */
